<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dedication</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="dedication" epub:type="dedication">

<p class='line0'>To</p>
<p class='line0'>GERALD DUCKWORTH</p>

<p class='noindent'>My dear Duckworth,</p>

<p>Permit me to address to you this Epistle Dedicatory,
for without you the series of books of which
this is the third and penultimate, could not have
existed. We have been working together for a
great number of years now and always without a
cloud on our relationships. At any rate there
has never been a cloud on my half of the
landscape.</p>

<p>I fancy that you at least know how much I dislike
not letting a book go merely as a book; but it appears
that if one has the misfortune to be impelled to
treat of public matters that is impossible. So let
me here repeat: As far as I am privately concerned
these books, like all my others, constitute an attempt
simply to reflect—not in the least to reflect on—our
own times.</p>

<p>Nevertheless as far as this particular book is
concerned I find myself ready to admit to certain
public aims. That is to say that, in it, I have been
trying to say to as much of humanity as I can reach,
and, in particular to such members of the public as,
because of age or for other reasons did not experience
the shocks and anxieties of the late struggle:</p>

<div class='blockquote'>

<p>“This is what the late war was like: this is
how modern fighting of the organised, scientific
type affects the mind. If, for reasons of gain or,
as is still more likely out of dislike for collective
types other than your own, you choose to
permit your rulers to embark on another war,
this—or something very accentuated along
similar lines—is what you will have to put up
with!”</p>

</div>

<p>I hope, in fact, that this series of books, for what
it is worth, may make war seem undesirable. But
in spite of that hope I have not exaggerated either
the physical horrors or the mental distresses of that
period. On the contrary I have selected for
treatment less horrible episodes than I might well
have rendered and I have rendered them with more
equanimity than might well have been displayed.
You see here the end of the war of attrition through
the eyes of a fairly stolid, fairly well-instructed man.
I should like to add that, like all of us, he is neither
unprejudiced nor infallible. And you have here
his mental re-actions and his reflections—which are
not, <span class='it'>not</span>, NOT presented as those of the author.</p>

<p>The hostilities in which he takes part are those
of a period of relative calm. For it should be remembered
that great battles, taking months and
months to prepare and to recover from, were of
relatively rare occurence. The heavy strain of the
trenches came from the waiting for long periods of
inaction, in great—in mortal—danger every minute
of the day and night.</p>

<p>The fighting here projected is just fighting, as you
might say at any old time: it is not specifically, say,
the battle of the 21st of March, 1918, or any particular
one of the series of combats after the 9th of
April, of that year.</p>

<p>Finally I have to repeat that, with the exception
of the central figure—as to whose Toryism I had
my say in the preface to the last-published book of
this series!—I have most carefully avoided so much
as adumbrating the characteristics—and certainly
the vicissitudes—of any human being known to
myself.</p>

<p>And, in the meantime, my dear Duckworth, let
me say that I shall always describe and subscribe, myself
as</p>

<p class='line0' style='text-align:right;margin-right:3em;'>Yours very gratefully,</p>
<p class='line0' style='text-align:right;margin-right:3em;'>Ford Madox Ford.</p>

<p class='line0' style='text-align:left;margin-left:1em;'>Paris, May 18th, 1926.</p>
</section></body></html>
